Discussion - part 1 (#213)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript: content/04.discussion.md

## Discussion

> Through OpenPBTA, we used an open, reproducible analysis framework within GitHub to bring together researchers and clinicians across the nation to genomically characterize 943 pediatric brain tumors across 59 distinct histologies.

Reviewer: "across the nation" 

Do we have international collaborators?

Author: oh good point - we do have clinicians outside - was thinking of those who worked on GitHub specifically, but I can update!

> To our knowledge, this was the first large-scale, collaborative open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing in which we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing in which we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date.
```

> We used available WGS, WXS, and RNA-Seq data to generate high-confidence consensus SNV and CNV calls, prioritize putative oncogenic fusions, and create over 40 code- and scientifically-reviewed scalable modules for common downstream cancer genomics analyses which have been used to create new knowledge as well as define new questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used available WGS, WXS, and RNA-Seq data to generate high-confidence consensus SNV and CNV calls, prioritize putative oncogenic fusions, and establish over 40 scalable modules that have undergone scientific and analytical code review and perform common downstream cancer genomics analyses.
```

Rephrasing suggestions based on wording in Figure 1 workflow panel. Also note sure that the phrase " which have been used to create new knowledge as well as define new questions" adds anything beyond what's already here

> We detect and show expected frequencies of genomic lesions, mutational signatures, and aberrantly regulated signaling pathways across multiple pediatric brain tumor histologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We detected and showed expected frequencies of genomic lesions, mutational signatures, and aberrantly regulated signaling pathways across multiple pediatric brain tumor histologies.
```

Molecular subtyping information was largely not collected nor available for this cohort, and if available (e.g.: sparse medulloblastoma subtypes), it had to be manually curated from pathology reports and/or free text clinical data fields.

> Furthermore, this tumor cohort has yet to be profiled by DNA methylation. 

Reviewer: Seems out of place. Does this mean the lack of methylation profiling is related to lack of subtyping? If so, rephrase to something like - "Furthermore, this tumor cohort has yet to be profiled by DNA methylation, increasing the challenge of determining molecular subtypes."

Author: oh yes - generally, brain tumors are profiled by methylation in order to determine subgroupings, and we did not have that for this project (underway currently, though!)

Author: fyi: https://www.molecularneuropathology.org/mnp/classifiers/11

Thus, to enable more targeted analyses to interrogate the biology of specific tumor subtypes, we created subtyping modules aligned with WHO molecularly-defined diagnoses.

> By working closely with pathologists and clinicians, we were able to determine a research-grade integrated diagnosis for 44% (1260/2840) of biospecimens and determine mis-diagnosed or mis-identified samples. 

Reviewer: I've rephrased this based on my reading that 44% of samples were EITHER identified or determined mis-identified. If my reading was incorrect, then a different rephrase would be helpful for clarity.

```suggestion
We worked closely with pathologists and clinicians to either determine a research-grade integrated diagnosis or update incorrectly diagnosed or identified samples for 44% (1260/2840) of biospecimens in the OpenPBTA cohort.
```

Author: does this sound better:

"We worked closely with pathologists and clinicians to determine a research-grade integrated diagnosis for 44% (1260/2840) of biospecimens as well as identify incorrectly diagnosed or mis-identified samples in the OpenPBTA cohort. " 

We removed mis-identified samples

Reviewer: I like that!

We applied multiple previously validated classifiers to RNA expression data.
We predicted medulloblastoma subtypes [@doi:10.1186/s13029-016-0053-y; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008263], whether tumors have dysfunctional _TP53_ [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076], and their degree of telomerase activity [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9].
By assessing _TP53_ and telomerase activity prospectively from expression data, information previously only attainable with genomic sequencing and/or qPCR, we can quickly add knowledge to our existing biological understanding of these tumors.

OpenPBTA has become a foundational layer to which we will continue to add other genomic modalities and analyses, such as germline, methylation, single cell, epigenomic, mRNA splicing, imaging, and model drug response data.

> We created the OpenPBTA project to provide robust code and data to the pediatric oncology community, as well as attract additional collaborators and new analyses to accelerate therapeutic translation for children with cancer, goals we are seeing play out in real-time.

Reviewer: I think this sentence should be earlier in the discussion with in the first 3 sentences.

Author: ✅

For example, RNA fusion data and the filtering module created within OpenPBTA set the stage for development of the R package, _annoFuse_ [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-03922-7], and RShiny application, _shinyFuse_ [@url:http://shiny.imbei.uni-mainz.de:3838/shinyFuse/].

> Using medulloblastoma subtyping and immune deconvolution analyses performed herein, Dang and colleagues showed enrichment of monocyte and microglia-derived macrophages within the SHH subgroup which they suggest may accumulate following radiation therapy [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108917].

Author: ha, I was trying to be non-repetitive!

> Expression and copy number analyses were used to demonstrate that _GPC2_ is a highly expressed and copy number gained immunotherapeutic target in ETMRs, medulloblastomas, choroid plexus carcinomas, H3 wildtype high-grade gliomas, as well as DMGs [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.06.451385].

Author: this one is foster as well, goes along with below but maybe I should add her name to the first one instead - will look at this again

> Foster, et. al subsequently developed a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) directed against _GPC2_, show preclinical efficacy in mouse models. 

Reviewer: `Foster et al.` or `Foster and colleagues`  - make consistent with Dang
